# Knowing the unknown unknown
Take comfort, the time will come when all men will see as I do - Jordano Bruno (1548 – 1600) 

In the previous piece, I discussed ways of thinking about the unknown. Here I will discuss the unknown unknown - does it exist at all?

## A history of the unknown unknown
The year was 2002 and the American secretary of defense, Donald Rumsfeld, was at a press conference at the Pentagon. At the time, the US was actively pursuing the global war on terrorism, and Rumsfeld was making the case to the world that the Iraqi government was tied to the Al-Qaida terrorist network. When asked by journalists about the US government's intelligence on Iraq, he unexpectedly offered an epistemological answer. While tacitly admitting that there is no hard intelligence on ties between terrorists and Iraq, he distinguished between the known unknown and the unknown unknown - things that his spies don't known they don't know. Subsequently we learned that Rumsfeld was stretching the truth in making the case for the war with Iraq, but the idea of the unknown unknown entered the popular discourse (Rumsfeld's subsequent autobiography was called “Known and Unknown: A memoir”, so notable was this episode.)
Was Rumsfeld the first person to use this phrase, and what's the history of the idea? While philosophers have been debating the limits of knowledge for millenia, serious study of the unknown is probably only 100 years old. This is not terribly surprising - the whole field of probability theory is one of the youngest areas of mathematics, dating to the work of Cardano in 1560s. Scientific tradition generally attributes ideas not to the first person who wrote them down, but to the first person to make a deep observation about them. And so, modern thinking about the limits of knowledge goes back to the pivotal year of 1921 when the young economist Frank Knight published his PhD thesis with the title "Risk, Uncertainty and Profit". The book was about Economics, not military intelligence but he pointed out a very similar challenge to Rumsfeld's unknown unknowns. Knight tried to understand the source of profits in the economy, particularly, why do some highly profitable businesses exist? (The problem is still an active area of research in Economics, with many different explanations). He argued that high profits arise when an entrepreneur makes a leap into the unknown and launches a business whose costs and revenues cannot be predicted with any certainty, and discovers a profit goldmine. 
He introduced a distinction between two concepts: "risk" and "uncertainty", where risk refers to something you can quantify and uncertainty is something you can't. Uncertainty is high when an entrepreneur launches a firm based on a new technology or a new business model, and where nobody has much prior experience - and it's precisely in these industries that the potential profit is high. Risk occurs in situations where we have previous experience and can plan for the unexpected using tools like data analysis and insurance. According to Knight, in these situations we can't expect to see a lot of profit. Thus, more mature industries would have low profits since the risks are well understood, and likely, many entrepreneurs have already entered the space. 
An interesting episode in Knight's life that might have originated Knight's interest in business uncertainty. When he was about 20 years old Knight moved out of his farm to the small town of Lexington in southern Illinois. There he found work at a startup of its era - a local telephone service company started by his uncle. One night an unexpected snowstorm hit the town knocking out all the phone lines except, unexpectedly, the lines of his uncle’s company. It was able to continue the service, reaping the profits. And so, as Knight would argue years later, businesses profit when they are operating in high uncertainty.
Coincidentally, 1921 also saw Knight's arch-rival in Economics, Britain's John Maynard Keynes make the same distinction in his Treatise on Probability. Economic theory of the time argued that mathematics and probability theory offer comprehensive methods for forecasting and planning. Keynes's book argued the opposite: according to him in reality we lack the data or methods to make even simple economic decisions using probability theory, such as whether to buy shares in a company. Buying shares requires us to somehow predict a company's profitability years into the future, including the costs of its operations, its market, and the broader economy. However, we lack any scientific basis to make such predictions due to the complexity of the economy, and at best must make subjective guesses or extrapolate from current trends. Knight's and Keyne's economic problem continued to attract economic research ever since it appeared in 1921, and is now known as Knightian uncertainty. Modern business and finance are still deeply concerned about these questions, with new books appearing on the topic every year. Thus, after their formulation in 1921, ideas of uncertainty diffused through Economics and Engineering, and eventually appeared in that notable briefing at the Pentagon in 2002.

## Black Swans
Modern research in finance is keenly aware of the existence of uncertainty, despite the existence of powerful computers and financial forecasts. Normally, whenever information arrives to the markets, such as an earnings report from a company, the price goes up or down to reflect the news. However, looking at those movements closely finds that prices tend to jump more than computer models would predict. Such large jumps indicate that the market price was far from the correct price, that is, the events were not predicted.
These price jumps were made famous in Nassim Taleb’s 2007 book "Black Swans". As Taleb defined it, Black Swans are adverse unpredictable rare events whose probability cannot be computed, and which tend to be ignored until it's too late. Cannonical Black Swans are the the US housing crisis of 2007 and 9/11 terrorist attacks. Paradoxically, usually some observers correctly anticipated these Black Swans, suggesting, as I argued before, that knowledge is plural - the unknown is often associated with lack of knowledge dissemination, not its absolute absence. The housing crisis was also largely anticipated in some circles, and impressively, some hedge funds placed bets on the failure of the mortgage, and made large profits on these bets. For 9/11, US intelligence have been following the Al-Qaida terrorist group and knew that attacks were being planned, but were surprised by the tactics (see the 9/11 Commission Report).
It should be noted that, while Black Swans, Knightian uncertainty, and the unknown unknown all discuss what happens out there when we go past the limits of our knowledge, they are not quite the same thing - a point that will become important in discussing solutions. Knightian uncertainty and Black Swans are almost always concerned with predicting the future, not knowing the present. They both distinguish between measurable and unmeasurable risks, events that could be quantified probabilistically or forecasted and those that cannot. Knight and Keynes were convinced that fairly ordinary questions about the future are not answerable using probabilistic methods. By contrast, the unknown unknown ("U-squared" for short) is a profound type of Knightian uncertainty: things we are not aware of, not merely things we can’t predict. It is possible to imagine a simple world containing no U-squared yet still unpredictable: for example, the world of an ordinary sandbox with kids playing and making a mess. Earthquakes are also uncertain in an ordinary way: they are rare and hard to predict, but they are not U-squared - in fact, they are very well known! If U-squared exists then it means that there are aspects of the world which we profoundly don’t understand and certainly can’t predict (and yet, as we will see in future chapters of this series, there is a lot we can do about them).

## Does the unknown unknown exist?
The unknown unknown ("U-squared") is seemingly easy to define - it's what we don't know that we don't know. Thus, if facts are like coins that we are collecting into an album, the known unknown is like missing coins in our album, and the unknown unknown is like coins we don't even know exist. In the previous piece I already argued that naive conceptions of knowledge are too simple: knowledge is usually not like coin collecting, and that the varieties of knowledge make defining knowledge very complex. In social systems, knowledge varies greatly between people, and some events were entirely known and foreseen by some, while completely blindsiding the majority. Systems of knowledge can be infinite, such as the ability to answer arbitrary questions.These complications make it difficult to decide whether a fact is truly an unknown unknown, putting into question the usefulness of the concept. 
But even if we look at the simplest case - of a single mind and a finite set of knowable facts - we get into logical problems. A naive view of the unknown unknown leads to paradoxes that raise the question whether it exists at all. 
Paradoxes
I often ask myself if a given concept is truly an unknown unknown or is it a known unknown: even when the concept is far from my domain of expertise, I can often recognize the individual words and deduce the general idea, and might have even heard about it at some point.
One paradox of U-squared is that it doesn’t work the way we would expect. I have almost no knowledge of some disciplines such as music theory and I know my knowledge of the field is tiny.  And yet, I can almost always recognize something as belonging in music theory - does this make all of music theory a known unknown, rather than an unknown unknown? 

Most concepts, even profoundly complex concepts can be named using familiar words. Taken to the extreme, while I can easily write out a list of all possible short phrases in English, including such phrases as "minor diatonic scale" (or at least write a computer program that does it), this surely can't mean that all concepts with short names are my known unknowns! 

Or consider this paradox of translation: I don't speak Hindi but I can recognize writing in Hindi, so anything written in Hindi is a known unknown to me. Paradoxically, by this logic, if a concept was an unknown unknown in English, once it becomes translated into Hindi, it becomes a known unknown! The ultimate paradox of U-squared is the apparent self-annihilation of the concept: as soon as we are exposed to an item from the “unknown unknown”, it becomes familiar, and is no longer an unknown unknown. For example, Cat333c might be an unknown unknown to you, but having read the word Cat330c once, you might start to call it a known unknown.
I think most of the paradoxes go away once we put more requirements around what it means by "know": knowing must involve more than pointing out the concept, recognizing the words in its name, or being able to guess what it means. Knowing should mean demonstrating the knowledge in some way, for example being able to define it in terms of simpler concepts. Calling something a known unknown should also be non-trivial. For example, we might require having the item on a pre-existing “priority to do list”, or experience struggling with a lack of knowledge about it. The paradox of self-annihilation could also be resolved by adding such a non-triviality requirement, but there is another solution too: to introduce a higher-level concept: the known unknown unknown. Recognition of something as the unknown unknown puts it in a kind of meta-album that lists it as U-squared.
In general, these paradoxes don't negate the existence of the unknown unknown, but rather point out that we need to be more careful when using it. Additionally, it's a little unclear precisely how much knowledge is required to call something a known unknown (except in special circumstances discussed below). Therefore, the boundary between a known unknown and an unknown unknown is not clearly defined. In practical cases it might be fine to call that entire space by terms like "the unknown" or "uncertainty" rather than trying to make a fine distinction.

## Demonstrating U-squared
We can do better than merely refuting paradoxes - there are circumstances where we clearly point to the unknown unknown. Specifically, in computer systems we can usually identify exactly what the computer knows, and sufficiently complex computers have what is effectively meta knowledge. Consider chatbots that answer questions on many websites like, “how do I return my shoes for a refund”. These chatbots are programmed with finite vocabularies of perhaps 10,000 words ("shoes", "refund" etc). The chatbot usually works by looking up these words in its table of questions and answers. While it doesn't have a list of known unknowns, when it encounters words that occur rarely in the list of answers, the chatbot is able to alter its behavior and say that the answers it gives might be helpful, but not necessarily. Finally, if the chatbot encounters words not its vocabulary, it's programmed to ask the person to rephrase the question, and ultimately give up.
U-squared is also found because of the limitations of the human mind. Despite our vast and flexible minds, we are often limited to what we can process and keep in our memory at a given time - a fact that in many practical situations means that we frequently operate as if we don't know them. In stock markets investors often think about the momentum of the market, entirely ignoring outside events or underlying economic forces. I remember that in early 2020, before governments started imposing lockdowns for COVID-19, the markets were holding steady in the face of the economic risks of the pandemic, as if they didn't exist!
As another illustration of how vast the unknown unknown could be, consider making an honest knowledge test. Suppose "knowing" a concept means more than just being able to guess what it means, and rather requires being able to give an English definition relatively similar to what is offered by an encyclopedia. Now consider technical acronyms - NVM, ASO and so on. How many people who are not specialists in a field would be able to define what the acronyms mean? - not many. Indeed, to non-experts many of the acronyms would be both unfamiliar and expand to words that are also unfamiliar or technical. The implication of this thought experiment is that the thousands of acronyms used in almost any field are examples of the unknown unknown. Arguably, other concepts (the "minor diatonic scale") are too, although they are not acronyms and use relatively familiar words, are actually examples of the unknown unknown.
Lastly, we should recognize that the human mind is limited even when used at its maximum capacity. The same is true for humanity as a whole, given our imperfect understanding of science, particularly of complex areas such as Climatology or Economics, that constantly produce new phenomena. Our history is full of examples where humans have failed to comprehend the nature of events, because it was far beyond the reach of knowledge at that time. In one memorable week of the 8th October 1604, observers around the globe observed a bright new star in the constellation of Ophiuchus. At its peak, it was brighter than any other star in the sky but then mysteriously disappeared by the end of the month. At the time, it was speculated to be a comet or a divine event. We now know that it was a supernova explosion near galactic coordinates G4.5+68. Whether it could be called a known unknown or an unknown unknown depends on our criteria. While some observers did recognize that they could not understand the event, we saw earlier that pointing out something does not generally make something a known unknown. In the 1600s, stars were believed to be lights on a black curtain surrounding the planets, and the idea of suns even existing outside our own sun was inconceivable to all but a few like Giordano Bruno, quoted above, who was condemned to death for his heretical views about cosmology. The supernova was an event far beyond human knowledge at the time, and God only knows what humanity is yet to learn.

## Summary
To sum up, not only does profound uncertainty exist, when considered carefully, we must operate under the assumption that our own knowledge (including the known unknown) is very limited as compared to the unknown unknown. While the mind's eye is surrounded by the comfortable and familiar furniture of daily life (speaking literally and figuratively), behind that furniture are vast spaces of the unknown unknown. It's time then we think seriously about how we can deal with these spaces - that’s the topic of the next chapter.

## References
* Peter L. Bernstein - Against the Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk. 1996 bookshop.org
* Frank H. Knight - Risk, Uncertainty and Profit (1921) books.google.com
* Ross Emmett - Discussion about Frank Knight biography of Frank Knight
* Nassim N. Taleb - The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable (2007) books.google.com
* Hugh Courtney, Jane Kirkland, and Patrick Viguerie - Strategy Under Uncertainty. HBR 1997 https://hbr.org/1997/11/strategy-under-uncertainty 
* Nathan R. Furr and Susannah Harmon Furr - The Upside of Uncertainty: A Guide to Finding Possibility in the Unknown. 2022 
