
# The unknown beyond probability theory

``` 
The further one goes, the less one knows.  - Laozi
```

What is knowledge, and why the unknown is not the opposite of known. The first article in a new series.

## The beginning
I met Stuart Evenhaugen in 2017, where he spoke at a conference on counter-terrorism in Washington, DC. As a government security planner, his mission was to protect air traffic from terrorists and thus prevent the next 9/11. The problem is that all airport security measures have holes. For example, terrorists might build a bomb that airport scanners can’t detect. It would seem, then, that we don't know how secure our airports are, and we should assume the worst: it's just a matter of time until the terrorists succeed. The speaker then offered an inspired remedy: While the holes are unknown, we do know how many overlapping security systems we have. We have intelligence sources, scanners, and air marshals on the planes. For an attack to succeed, the terrorists need to find a way of evading these three distinct systems. Thus, we can quantify our security level without knowing what the terrorists might have in the suitcase. Or more conceptually, we can cope with the unknown, despite having no data about it.

To see why this is such an insightful idea, consider how we cope with the unknown in business, security and everyday planning.
The most common approach is to hold some reserves, such as keeping extra cash in the bank in case of large expenses, or doing risk assessment using probability theory. The former approach is quite expensive and not always feasible. The latter involves assigning a probability to unknown outcomes, but in many cases we have little or no data. We can't really estimate the probability of terrorists building an invisible bomb. 

Therefore, I was inspired by the talk to start a quest to find novel ideas for defining and overcoming the unknown. After extensive research, I now know that a variety of non-probabilistic methods in different disciplines have already been invented, and there might be others left to discover or make famous. If we can build airport security despite the threat of an unknown adversary, could we also map and solve the unknown in business, in strategy and even in daily situations? To me, this is an irresistible challenge.

This quest is linked to the problem of decision making that occupies all decision sciences - probability theory, game theory and other fields. Like in decision sciences, we are interested in strategies to make good decisions in spite of uncertainty. However, the project here is not about biases in decision making. Rather we are interested in what comes before - the knowledge (or lack thereof), and how we can make good decisions regardless.

## Domains of knowledge
To start, let's try to discuss some examples of knowledge, and what could be potentially knowable. 
A common intuitive view of knowledge is that it’s a box of facts, or a book for collecting coins. The book of coins has chapters for different countries, and each chapter has little pockets for each denomination. As you find more coins you fill up the pockets. Knowledge of facts sometimes works this way too – the facts that we know are like pockets filled with coins in this book, and the unknown facts are the empty pockets.

In computer science, the most common model of knowledge is called a knowledge graph. For example, “Mary likes John” and “John likes bananas” is a simple graph with three objects - Mary, John and bananas, and the relationship “like”. In general, the number of objects and different types of relationships could be quite large, and allow a database to store a lot of different objects. Knowledge graphs are used widely to represent online social networks like Facebook, ontologies of facts and almost anything. 

However, most domains of knowledge are not like books of coins or even knowledge graphs. Take for example a seemingly simple list of facts - the populations of all major cities last year. It would appear that there is little ambiguity about knowledge here; either we know a city's population or we don't. And yet in most situations where we need to use this knowledge, there is a great deal of context which is just as important as the numbers. Does a given city's boundary include most of its nearby cities, or not? How big are the measurement errors? Does it count people who commute into town? 

The book of coins is also very nicely finite and that someone found all the countries and all their coins and made pockets for them. By contrast, in many areas of knowledge, the list of facts is infinite and there is nobody to list them. Consider the slightly more complex problem of answering questions about the population of cities: "Which city has more people, New York or London?" or "Are there more people in the major cities of France or England?" There is an infinity of possible questions that could be asked. There could be at least as many questions as there are arithmetical questions about whole numbers - the infinite domain of mathematical Number Theory! It would take an infinite book to store all the answers. We could build a computer system to answer some questions about cities and give it the ability to compute some of them - but it would be entirely unclear how much knowledge it has. It's possible that it can answer an infinity of questions correctly, and another infinite list of questions partially wrong or not at all.

Philosophers discussing knowledge also highlighted an issue called justification of knowledge. Simply having a datum doesn't make it knowledge. In epistemology, the philosophy of knowledge, knowledge is often defined as justified true beliefs. True beliefs means that knowledge is all facts about the universe that are recorded in our brain, which agree with reality. The word "justified" requires the belief to be based on a reliable process for acquiring knowledge or evidence, and not just a true guess or something accidentally true. For example, people who correctly guess the numbers of a lottery ticket can hardly be considered "knowing" the numbers.  Only someone who actually operated the number-making machine or a time traveler would really know them. In a similar vein, I might guess that stocks would be up this year, and I might be right, but my knowledge of the fact would not be well-justified. Only someone who has analyzed the stock market can be said to really know that the stocks would be up.

Another complexity relates to the distinction between different types of knowledge about facts. Modern psychology established that we typically know a small set of facts, called explicit memory, which are a lot like the coins in the book. When asked, we have the answer. The remaining long-term memory is implicit memory. It’s not directly accessible and is vastly larger. Indeed, some patients who suffer from a brain injury might declare that they have never played a piano, but once presented with it, can suddenly perform different tunes from their deep memories. Another related idea, which we will discuss at length later, is the idea of knowledge about knowledge - knowing that we know or don’t know something. This leads to the idea of the known unknown and the unknown unknown - things we know we don't know, and things we don't even know that we don't know. The book of coins can represent the known unknown as empty pockets, but it can’t represent the unknown known or the unknown unknown.

Thus far, we talked about knowledge within a single human mind or a single computer. Indeed, the philosophical conception of knowledge, along with much of decision theory, usually looks into the mind of a single person. Yet in most ways the relevant kind of knowledge is plural: what we know. For example, the change in the price of stocks on a given day is driven by the information held by the average investor trading on that day. What matters is what the traders know and frequently, they miss a big part of the picture. Even in organizations where there is a dictatorial boss, his or her decisions need to be communicated to the last soldier, or else they might not know where to shoot. Such plural knowledge is too often overlooked, despite the fact that it affects organizations, stockmarkets and elections. Moreover, it becomes nonsensical to say that something is known or unknown when each person can have a different state of mind, and so the average knowledge is in the gray zone somewhere between 0 and 1: between nobody knows and everyone knows. 

In sum, these illustrations show that knowledge is rarely just a record of facts, but rather different domains of knowledge. Moreover, while simple facts are either known or unknown, most domains of knowledge probably involve many gray zones.

## From Knowledge to Ignorance
Having reviewed examples of knowledge, we are now ready to look beyond into the unknown. The most common approach is to define the unknown as the negation of knowledge. In English, the unknown is often used to mean things that are not known. If we look at the domains of knowledge above, the unknown includes scenarios where we don't have the facts, questions we can't answer quite right, guesses we can't justify, and the questions where multiple decision makers have different levels of information. 

However, this view of the unknown is incorrect. For one, if knowledge is not binary, then it makes no sense to think of the unknown as the negation of the known. Black might be the negation of white, but what is the negation of gray? Indeed, in some languages, the unknown is not a negation of the word known but rather its own noun. The word for “unknown” in Arabic, for example, is majhul –  which could be translated as “ignorance”.
Therefore, a helpful method for addressing the unknown is to assume that it is not the same as the opposite of the known. Avoiding this dichotomy allows us to accept that some things could be both known and unknown, similar to how the color purple could be made from both blue and red. This explains why acquiring knowledge can be transformative to our understanding of the world, a little like seeing a new color or a new dimension. I’m reminded of the book Flatland by Edwin Abbott, where everyone lives in two dimensions. One day the protagonist is lifted from the flat plane where he lived his entire life into the third dimension and saw in three dimensions for the first time. New knowledge is often a little transformative like that to our worldview, and adding a coin to the book doesn’t capture the effect at all.

It is also helpful to see the unknown as its own color or dimension for another reason: It expands our ways of thinking about it. If the unknown is not just the negation of the known, it raises thought-provoking questions such as: How do we see it better? What is the amount of unknown in a given case? How can we minimize the negative effects and maximize the positive effects on us? In the next piece, I will discuss the unknown unknown, what it means, and the problem of Black Swans.
